Amortized analysis

- Definition

- How it is different from average case analysis

  - Guaranteed average cost per operation in the worst case

- When is amortized analysis used?

Aggregate analysis

- Definition – Amortized cost of each operation is the average of the
  total cost.

  - Implication : Typically the occurrence of costly operation is bound
    by some limitation.

- Data structure where i'th operation costs i is i is a power of 2 and 1
  otherwise

Accounting method

- Definition – Amortized cost of an operation may consist of credit for
  other undercharged operations and this credit is associated with an
  object of the data structure.

  - What does this mean? Same as above.

- Binary counter with increment and reset operation

- Data structure where i'th operation costs i is i is a power of 2 and 1
  otherwise

Potential method

- Similar to the accounting method. Instead of associating a prepaid
  credit with a particular data item in the data structure, the total of
  all the prepaid credit is associated with the entire data structure.
  This is called the potential of the data structure.

- An operation either adds to the potential of the data structure or
  uses some of the stored potential to offset an exorbitant cost.

- Amortized cost of an operation is ,
  $${\widehat{c_{i}} = {c_{i} + \{}}\Phi{{(D_{i})} - \Phi}{(D_{i - 1})}\}$$

  - $$\{\Phi{{(D_{i})} - \Phi}{(D_{i - 1})}\}$$being positive means that
    there is more potential associated with D after the i'th operation
    than there was after the (i-1)th operation, i.e., the i'th operation
    has added to the potential of D
  - $$\{\Phi{{(D_{i})} - \Phi}{(D_{i - 1})}\}$$ being negative means
    that there is less potential associated with D after the i'th
    operation than there was after the (i-1)th operation, i.e., the i'th
    operation is making use some of the stored potential.

- Total amortized cost over n operations is
  $${{\sum\limits_{i = 0}^{n}\widehat{c_{i}}} = {{\sum\limits_{i = 0}^{n}c_{i}} + \{}}\Phi{{(D_{n})} - \Phi}{(D_{0})}\}$$.
  As long as $$\Phi{{(D_{n})} \geq \Phi}{(D_{0})}$$this gives an upper
  bound over the actual cost.

- In general as n is not know in advance it is required that
  $$\forall i,\Phi{{(D_{i})} \geq \Phi}{(D_{0})}$$ for the total
  amortized cost to be an upper bound over the actual cost.

- Forming a potential function

  - The general intuition in forming a potential function for a data
    structure should be based on what is called as the exorbitant cost
    operation, i.e., the operation which has the worst cost,
    incomparable to the cost of other operations.
  - Generally the frequency of occurrence and cost of the exorbitant
    cost operation is constrained by the frequency of occurrence of
    normal cost operations.
  - By the time the exorbitant cost operation is performed enough
    potential should have been generated by normal operations so as to
    bound the exorbitant cost to a constant by offsetting it with the
    potential stored in D.

Applications

- [Stack
  operations](../../../Academic/Programming,%20Data%20Structures%20and%20Algorithms/Notes/Amortized%20analysis%20of%20stack%20operations.md)
- [Binary counter
  operations](Amortized%20analysis%20of%20Binary%20Counter%20operations.md)
- [Normal and power of two
  operations](Amortized%20analysis%20of%20a%20data%20structure%20with%20normal%20and%20power-of-two%20operations.md)
- [Minimum heap
  operations](Amortized%20Analysis%20of%20Min-Heap%20operations.md)
- [Queue
  ](Amortized%20analysis%20of%20queue%20operations%20when%20implemented%20using%20two%20stacks.md)[operations
  when
  ](Amortized%20analysis%20of%20queue%20operations%20when%20implemented%20using%20two%20stacks.md)[implement](Amortized%20analysis%20of%20queue%20operations%20when%20implemented%20using%20two%20stacks.md)[ed](Amortized%20analysis%20of%20queue%20operations%20when%20implemented%20using%20two%20stacks.md)[
  using two
  stacks](Amortized%20analysis%20of%20queue%20operations%20when%20implemented%20using%20two%20stacks.md)
- Deleting larger half -
  http://ihome.ust.hk/~zluab/teaching/comp3711h/comp3711h-t9-solutioni-q2.pdf
- [Dynamic array
  operations](Amortized%20analysis%20of%20the%20resizing%20operations%20on%20a%20dynamic%20table.md)
- Queue operations when implemented using two stacks
